my way on the shady side of the barracks anything
every every object had a shape because of that
right so there was a plus side to that as long as you
could stay out of the light so that gave me a route
immediately it told me exactly where i had to go i
could only stay in the shadow even the tumbleweed
had a shadow that's how bright it was and it was just
at that break between the first and the second
fence. And then the tower had a clear view of that
distance between those two fences, which is
roughly the width of this room. Now, there's an
inner fence here. And an outer fence. And an outer
fence. This is the safety line, the fiery line, the
one that you touch. And the man on the tower is right
in the middle. He looks right down that alley. I
see. How close did you cross where the tunnel
was? And as close to the nearest shadow I was, so
that I had the shortest distance to step out of the
shadow to the first fence and silence. Then I felt
silence was the secret. If I didn't alert them, if I
didn't make a sound, I would get to the first fence.
wire, and hopefully through the second, without
making a sound. But all the time you're shivering,
you're like this. And I don't remember how I spread
the things apart, because I think you just work on
the memory. You just do it. And whether I got
scratched or what, whether it was blood, it
wouldn't have mattered. You don't feel anything.
You're numb at that point. Totally numb. And once I
got through the second fence, and I was outside,
and all there was was tumbling. There was no trees,
you know, trees you could hide. So I thought about
the Indians, my good old stories from childhood,
you know, that you cannot step on a twig or roll a
rock. And just be as silent as you can and not make
any sudden moves that were to the guard in the
tower. And of course the further I got away I could
see that although it seemed very clear like
daylight after you got to be a couple hundred
yards, then it became kind of foggy. And so if I just
stayed relatively still and did move slowly, I
felt the further I'm naturally going, the better,
even though it was, like I say, bright, like a sunny
day, full moon over here. But it is, of course, a
different light than a big one. And once I got out of
range of these camp lights, these big search
lights that they had, they were always moving, you
know. And somehow they went over me or past me. They
just didn't pick me up. Unless they pick you up
directly, you're in the dark, you know, so to
speak. But they were constantly moving. And then
after I got out of that range, I started to run.
And I just ran and ran and ran. And it didn't seem
like very long, I did get to that point. But it
amounted. And lo and behold, there was a train that
had just started up. A freight train. Just started
up. But how do you get on a moving train? And which,
which, um, thing, and which caboozer do you do? Uh,
which car? Car you get on. Well, I picked this low
car. Cold, where they transport coal. I couldn't
see any coal. I didn't see anything except the
flat, low car. And I remember it was a real
struggle. to pull myself up on it, because I had no
foothold. It's like a rock climber without a
piton, or as they call these things. But, you know,
there again, it's the adrenaline, and it says, I
cannot fall, I cannot fall. I must
pull myself up, no matter what. And, I mean, and I
haven't been fairly good in gymnastics, too,
which, it was a gymnastic thing, you know, we did
that in everybody, but you pull yourself up on the
rock. That's the kind of thing. And then the car was
empty. And it was bright as daylight. Because I'm
not sure I would have shown that into the car. But it
made just a little angle in the shadow. And I sat in
the shadow. I sat down. It was cold. The steel was
cold. But it didn't matter. I was shivering and
breathing. Sick to my stomach anyway. So I sat
there. And I looked back to the camp. I could see the
lights going. What seemed like a little... busier
than before. And I heard some shouting and some
dogs barking. And I wasn't sure if they got louder
or the dogs got louder. And the train didn't move
very far. It stopped. So there I sat in the car and
the voices became louder and louder. It sounded
like somebody had stopped the train. So I thought,
okay, my goose is cooked. Somebody just got to the
trainer, searching. I could hear voices and I
could hear some dogs, but I just, you know, you have
two choices. You either run or you sit tight.
And it may have been a search party. They may have
just looked into the big cars, the ones with the
sliding doors, but nobody would want to climb up on
that, that open box car, because there is no door.
It takes quite a, it's quite a job to climb up and get
over. I think maybe that's a big direct kind of car
that they didn't, that they felt was necessary to.
And you think they were searching the cars? I
really thought so. I thought they stopped the
train and had started up and stopped. And I could
hear dogs and voices, people walking almost
nearby. But there again, I'm pretty sure they
were. Oh, they probably were. Yeah. And then the
train started out. And once it started out, it
rolled. It rolled all night. Next day, it just
rolled. Desert, desert, desert. Where we flew
over today, you know, it was going west. That was a
lucky break. It went west. It went east. Too many
people. Too many people to recognize. Here it was
this big country. And when the train stopped in a
small town, I did get out and went to the town. The
streetlights were off. I remember that. It was a
tree-lined town, a street. And I don't remember
which town it was. Tucson? What's that other one on
the way? It had to be on the... On the real line.
Southern Pacific. Is it? Southern Pacific? Yeah,
the 66 route to...
And I paid him back for that free ride because I
rescued the passengers. That's right. That's
right. I paid him back. That was the Southern
Pacific also? The Southern Pacific. We have to
really look into this. We're trying to figure out
what rail line it would be by looking on the map.
I've looked and looked. I have some maps here. I
mean, we can look at some of the maps. That'd be no
problem. Yeah, it should be hard to locate that.
shouldn't be hard to locate that can only be one one
way there's two it goes in layers you know the
southernmost is i think the one and
and the two women i heard there was very little
light people were some light in some houses and i
walked the street and two women came out out of one
house and they saw me and one of them pointed at me, I
was
maybe like 50 yards away from them, and one of them
pointed at me and laughed and talked to the other
woman and I just got scared and ran back to the
railroad.
And then when the train would stop on some of those
desert places way out in the boonies you would see
hobos get off you know people that were riding the
train besides you but there was nobody in your car
nobody and So I must have made some acquaintance
with those people, because I just remember
joining up with some of those migrant farmers.
Or at least met them. But there again, my time may be
a little off, because I remember I did want to get to
a harbor to, I want to get on a boat and go to South
America. And I do remember going all the way into
the train does go pretty close to the coast along
the beach area somewhere in there. And I worked my
way to San Pedro.
And I got a job in a cafe as a dishwasher, because
people, they wanted dishwashers badly. This is in
Clinton's. This is Clinton's cafeteria? No. No,
this is in, Clinton's is in San Francisco. This is
near the harbor. You could almost look at the ships
from that little cafe. So we're talking
September, October, November. Yeah, I think so. I
remember looking and checking that out, and there
was no way I could figure out how to get on the ship,
because they had only one entrance, that little
bit of stairway they have going up, and it's always
somebody there checking you, and of course these
boats are so big, there's no way you can get on them.
I thought about climbing up on those. ropes and
gave that up, kill yourself. And then what would
you do after you're on there? What would you eat?
You know, I just couldn't figure out a way to get on a
boat and become a successful stowaway. I just
couldn't figure it out. So I turned, turned
around, ran away back to the, probably picking
fruit, went into I met some families. One of the
families, they were going to Oregon picking
apples. You have to go with whatever fruit is ready
for harvest. And I remember it was a nice family
from Arkansas,
Oklahoma. The old man and his wife and a daughter, a
nice looking daughter. the right age for me. And
they kind of wanted to make a little match there.
They saw you as a potential son-in-law. Yeah,
potential son-in-law. And you, you know, you're a
source of revenue. Everybody works in the field,
so that means that much more money coming in for the
table. And they were very sweet and shared food,
you know. Mexican or? No, no. Actually, Very much
the same as you read in the Grapes of Wrath. At the
same time, people were still... Just down and out
folks. That was their way of life. They wouldn't
want it any other way. That's all they knew and
that's all they were talking about. There was
still, when I later on read and saw the movie Grapes
of Wrath, I said, that's the people I was working
with. Just honest, hardworking.
And they traveled as a family. Yeah, and some of
them. Then I met one that was alone. Also, you need
somebody to help you. It's easy to get work if you
apply at a farmer and say, here, we have two hands.
We have four hands, five hands, et cetera, rather
than just showing them by yourself. It's much
harder to get work. Who was your first, who do you
think helped you? Right away, who would you? Um,
nobody really. They all helped, but I wouldn't
stay very long because I was always afraid that
they were going to ask me some more questions and
the longer I stayed with them I felt the longer more
likely it was going to happen. So, I would always,
as soon as I got a little bit of money, enough to get
either on a bus or, you know, I prefer the bus to the
train, you know, to the hobo thing. And the bus was
not very expensive in those days. The Greyhound
bus, you could probably go for $6. You could
probably go from Los Angeles to San Francisco for
$6 or $7. You left a note and just left, or you
didn't? Just left. It was the safest way. I'm sure
some people thought it was strange, but I don't
know. When they read the book, they'll see. I
remember this guy. Say more. Say more. You're
probably
getting
hunched
again. Yeah, we're probably... about Ray, you
know? So whenever you, whatever you want to do. But
one of the things I remember real quick before I
forget it was agonizing to give myself up was when I
watched television later on, I was a Perry Mason
fan. Because you get all your legal advice. Yeah,
it's free legal advice. Yeah, free legal advice.
And he used to say in court, if it's a matter of life
and that you do not take any action, you do not ask
any questions, unless you know the answer.
So there was no point in, what that meant to me was, I
wasn't going to ask anybody, is it all right? Yes.
If I asked somebody, is that all right what I'm
doing? And he'd say, no. Where would I be? Yes. You
see? So I didn't have the right. I didn't know
anybody who had the answer. If somebody said, all
you have to do is turn yourself in and you're all
right. Yes. Maybe. But if not, it was your life that
was in trouble. That was good enough, though.
Perry Mason would advise against it. Yes, he
would. Yes, he would. It's a good point. What did
you think was going to happen if they caught you?
Well, they'd probably just send me. Send me back.
When did it become, was it ever a game, an
adventure? Or was it genuine fear that you would be
shipped back? Part of it fear, and part of it was
naturally I felt like the fox and the hunter. You
want to send me away? I said, okay, you go catch me.
There have to be moments, many moments, when you
say, how stupid these people are. I can understand
that. Oh, no, no. I never felt that. I read articles
about these other guys that said these things.
Well, to me, that's dumb. They're already dumb.
You just brought up something. Two things here
that I have seen him be very upfront about, really
get upset about. One of them is when somebody
suggested he stole pants. It really made him mad.
That he stole the pants that he used to get out of the
camp. And the other was any kind of implication
that he was trying to... Be smarter than... Be
smarter, yeah, better. Yeah, that just... It
really upsets him. Where did they accuse him of
stealing pants? Some article I read. They accused
him of stealing, and in fact, it just came back
through the laundry. Sure. Well, we'll make a big
point out of that. He stole pants from the guard. I
think it's in one of those articles that you sent
us the copies of. Some of the story. Well, maybe the
guard lost his pants somewhere else. He needed to
get it on a pair of pants, so he claimed that Dennis
had stolen them. The other one said that I was
reading and collecting maps. I had thorough
knowledge of the terrain, and I think I can read a
map, an American map. I can't hardly read it now.
That's because you need your navigator. Yeah, I
had to marry my navigator. No, it's just much more
simple. Where's the nearest water fountain? It
isn't on your map. You have to have a drink of water.
You need something to eat. You have to pick some
fruit. Let me just pause. Yeah, I'm just going to go
to the bathroom for a moment. OK.
We've used up a whole pan on this. Really? How many
pans have you done already? Until I count one, two,
three, four, five, six, seven,
eight, nine, 10, 11, 13. Oh, here's another one,
Harold. I can cart it. My attorney has that one.
That's another thing that my niece is sending
through the mail. It's another ID card. It's
a different waterproof material. This is just a
copy of the outside
copy. It's lucky. There are so many lucky things.
His parents were just so... And they didn't know
what you were saying. No, my mother told my nieces
that, Gare, he's not dark. He's not dark. Well, in
1956 at Christmas, they saw your picture on the
table. um
and i thought my dad would want wouldn't have
wanted me to do anything else why did he send me to
school to learn english and and do all these things
just you know to prepare he gave me a driver's
license test without having a car So maybe he was
being planned. Maybe he was somehow planned. I
always felt, and he gave me knickerbockers and
suits and stuff. What for? You know, he felt, I
think he, like any father, would just want his son.
To know all the important, all the things that one
needs to survive. Yes. I really believe that. Why
did I stop? Oh, we didn't stop. It's still going?
No. Okay. So that was whenever I had twinges, you
know, about... Why don't I go look for them? Then I
would say, he wouldn't want me to do that because
I'd only endanger myself. He goes, I didn't raise a
dummy. What for? What are you doing here, you
dummy? That's a good point. It also makes it easier
for you to live on your own and not do it. Yes.
Did
you make any effort to alter your physical
appearance?
To
dye your hair or grow a mustache? Yeah, I thought
about it. I thought about it. Or to grow a mustache.
Yeah, but in those days, everybody was clean
shaped. And that was bothering. That was hard.
Once the beard came in, I felt better. With the
beard. Once it was fashionable. Jean liked the
beard, so it was her idea. Yeah,
because you can see that this picture here is very
close to my wanted picture. What about when you
were Peter Peterson? Didn't you tell me something
about your change? That was your first name. Yeah,
I took the name of Peter Peterson. because my
barber had told me that I don't know each group.
Yes. And I had a buckle, I bought a buckle in
downtown Los Angeles, and I had Peter Petersen,
right, that gave us my ID card. Oh, that's clever. I
put Peter Petersen. That's clever. So you never
changed your appearance consciously? You didn't
dye your hair or grow mustache or something? I
didn't have the money and the know-how problem.
And you never told anybody? No. I felt they were
absolutely essential. Because if you read any
books in history or any other kind of book,
Somebody always laughs. I mean, the history is,
you know, you have a fight and somebody betrays
you. Yes. Or jealousy or whatever. You've got to
keep that simple, that part, I think. Thank you.
No, I didn't want to talk about it. No, but I mean,
you never told anybody about it. All these years.
You know how the people are going to be astonished
when this book is out? They're going to see you on a
today's show and say, Mike, what? And the thing
was, I was in the public eye. Yes, for the
photographs of the tennis matches and the herb
cages. International matches and celebrity
matches, a lot of Hollywood people. I like the one
about Robert Stagg. Robert Stagg, excuse me. He
wanted me to come down. He asked Gina and I to come
down and play tennis on his private court. And I was
going to teach him the backhand.
I wanted to go with Gina. See, she saves me. I would
have gone, see? She saves me from my... From
yourself. From myself.
So she's the perfect maid for a fugitive. That
might be a good chapter. Wait till you get on. Yeah,
perfect page for the fugitive.